=== LEFT ===
Sources of Ancient
New NCERT Class VI (What Books and Burials Tell
Ancient Indian History), Old NCERT Class
Old NCERT Class XI
(Types of Sources and Historical
(Bricks, Beads and Bones), New NCERT
Archaeological Excavations
1.
Archaeological evidence of a bead-making
industry in the Sangam Era, using precious and
semi-precious stones, has been found in
Kodumanal. It is located in which of the
following present day states of India?
(Chap 2, Class-XII, New NCERT)
(a) Andhra Pradesh (b) Karnataka
(c) Tamil Nadu (d) Kerala
Ans. (c)

Exp. Archaeological evidence of a bead-making
industry, using precious and semi-precious stones, has
been found in Kodumanal. At present, it is located in
Tamil Nadu. The site is located on North bank of river
Noyyal. It was an important ancient trade city
belonging to the Sangam Era.
2.
With reference to the methodology of excavation
of mound, which among the following
statement(s) is/are correct?
(Chap 3, Class-XI, Old NCERT)
1. Vertical excavations results in uncovering the
period-wise sequence of cultures.
2. Horizontal excavation is generally confined to
entire or part of a particular site.
Codes
(a) Only 1 (b) Only 2
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
Ans. (c)

Exp. Both the statements (1) and (2) are correct
with reference to the methodology of excavation of
mound. A mound can be excavated vertically or
horizontally.
=== RIGHT ===
Ancient History
History
Us), Old NCERT Class XI (The Importance of
XI (Modern Historians of Ancient India),
New NCERT Class XII
Construction),
Class XII (Kings, Farmers and Towns)
Vertical excavation is done by doing lengthwise digging
to uncover the period-wise sequence of cultures; it is
usually limited to a part of the site.
Horizontal excavation means digging the mound’s most
of the part or entirely. This method enables the
excavator to get a complete idea of the site culture in a
particular period.
3.
The excavation at Chanhudaro was directed by
(Chap-1, Class-XII, New NCERT)
(a) JH Mackay (b) Sir John Marshall
(c) REM Wheeler (d) Sir Aurel Stein
j Ans. (a)
Exp. The excavation at Chanhudaro was directed by
JH Mackay. Chanhudaro was tiny settlement (less than
7 hectares) located in Sindh province of Pakistan. This
site was almost exclusively devoted to craft production,
including bead-making, shell-cutting, metal-working,
seal-making and weight-making.
4.
Two Indians who were associated with discovery
of Indus Valley Civilisation are
(Chap-4, Class-XI, Old NCERT) (CGPSC Pre 2003)
(a) Rakhal Das Banerjee and Dayaram Sahni
(b) John Marshall and Ishwari Prasad
(c) Ashirwadi Lal Srivastava and Rangnath Rao
(d) Madhosarup Vats and UB Rao
Ans.
j (a)
Exp.
Rakhal Das Banerjee and Dayaram Sahni were
two Indian Archaeologist associated with discovery of
Indus Valley Civilisation. Dayaram Sahni was involved
in excavation of Harappa whereas Rakhal Das Banerjee
was involved in excavation of Mohenjodaro. They
carried out excavation under Director-Generalship of
Sir John Marshall.
